---
layout: post
title: What I've Been Reading
categories: Personal
---
A list of books I am currently reading or have read. Think of this as a virtual bookshelf, as much for myself as you.  One day, I may get around to adding in some simple notes about each book.  I will try to keep this list updated throughout the years.

## 2022

1. **The Magicians** *Lev Grossman*
2. **The Adventures of Tom Sawyer** *Mark Twain*
3. **A Little Life** *Hanya Yanagihara*
4. **The Divide** *Matt Taibbi*
5. **A Legacy of Spies** *John Le Carre*
6. **The Book of Longings** *Sue Monk Kidd*
7. **To Sleep in a Sea of Stars** *Chris Paolini*
8. **Children of Time** *Adrian Tchaikovsky*
9. **Crime and Punishment** *Fyodor Dostoevsky*

## 2021

1. **Gut: The Inside Story of Our Body's Most Underrated Organ** *Giulia Enders*'
2. **The Best of Kim Stanley Robinson** *Kim Stanley Robinson*
3. **The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle** *Haruki Murakami*
4. **The Sirens of Titan** *Kurt Vonnegut*
5. **What I Talk About When I Talk About Running** *Haruki Murakami*
6. **Stand on Zanzibar** *John Brunner*
7. **Beloved** *Toni Morrison*
8. **Watership Down** *Richard Adams*
9. **The Plague** *Albert Camus*
10. **Amusing Ourselves to Death** *Neil Postman*
11. **The Big Sleep** *Raymond Chandler*
12. **Cat's Cradle** *Kurt Vonnegut*
13. **The Shock Doctrine** *Naomi Klein*
14. **The Thin Man** *Dashiell Hammett*
15. **The Long Sleep** *Raymond Chandler*
16. **Reaper Man** *Terry Pratchett*
17. **Cathedral** *Raymond Carver*
18. **Small Gods** *Terry Pratchett*
19. **Tokyo Vice** *Jake Adelstein*
20. **Call of the Dead** *John le Carre*
21. **Anathem** *Neal Stephenson*
22. **Eating Animals** *Jonathan Safran Foer*
23. **The Constant Gardener** *John le Carre*
24. **The Falcon of Sparta** *Conn Iggulden*
25. **Monday Starts on Saturday** *Arkady & Boris Strugatsky*
26. **When Breath Becomes Air** *Paul Kalanithi*
27. **The Dead Mountaineer's Inn** *Arkady & Boris Strugatsky*
28. **Humankind** *Rutger Bregman*
29. **Pale Fire** *Vladimir Nabokov*
30. **Hard To Be a God** *Arkady & Boris Strugatsky*
31. **Sundiver** *David Brin*
32. **Startide Rising** *David Brin*
33. **The Uplift War** *David Brin*
34. **The Count of Monte Cristo** *Alexandre Dumas*
35. **Dark Star Safari** *Paul Theroux*
36. **V For Vendetta** *Alan Moore and David Lloyd*
37. **A Canticle For Leibowitz** *Walter Miller Jr.*
38. **The Mote in God's Eye** *Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle*
39. **Blindsight** *Peter Watts*
40. **The Winter of our Discontent** *John Steinbeck*
41. **A Farewell to Arms** *Ernest Hemingway*

## 2020

1. **The Grapes of Wrath** *John Steinbeck*
2. **Atonement** *Ian McEwan*
3. **Where the Crawdads Sing** *Delia Owens*
4. **Freedom** *Jonathan Franzen*
5. **Poland** *James Michener*
6. **Memoirs of a Geisha** *Arthur Golden*
7. **The Corrections** *Jonathan Franzen*
8. **Chasm City** *Alastair Reynolds*
9. **Mexico** *James Michener*
10. **The Art of Racing in the Rain** *Garth Stein* 
11. **Educated** *Tara Westover*
12. **Hidden Empire** *Kevin J Anderson*
13. **Essays on Wilderness and Risk** *Jon Krakauer*
14. **The Three Body Problem** *Cixin Liu*
15. **Winesburg, Ohio** *Sherwood Anderson*
16. **Thirteen Moons** *Charles Frazier*
17. **The Robber Bride** *Margaret Atwood*
18. **Voss** *Patrick White*
19. **Cannery Row** *John Steinbeck*
20. **The Master and Margarita** *Mikhail Bulgakov*
21. **The Dark Forest** *Cixin Liu*
22. **Taiko** *Eiji Yoshikawa*
23. **Rendezvous With Rama** *Arthur C Clarke*
24. **Death's End** *Cixin Liu*
25.  **Factulness** *Hans Rosling*
26. **God Help the Child** *Toni Morrison*
27. **Kafka on the Shore** *Haruki Murakami*
28. **The Dispossessed** *Ursula Le Guin*
29. **A Man Called Ove** *Frederik Backman*
30. **Never Split the Difference** *Christopher Voss and Tahl Rax*
31. **The Earthsea Quartet** *Ursula Le Guin*
32. **Exhalation** *Ted Chiang*
33. **The Beach** *Alex Garland*
34. **The Rift** *Nina Allan*
35. **Stranger in a Strange Land** *Robert Heinlein*
36. **Solaris** *Stanislaw Lem*
37. **Lolita** *Vladimir Nabokov*
